And the impact of that. Also, we were building out
here, which is a whole new area, and there weren't
builders and workmen and so forth in the area. So we
went all through that in, let's say, the end of 73,
most, I mean, end of 72, all 73. We opened in October
of 74. And about that time, it just went nosedive
again. And then we cut away back in 75. 76
residential sales start picking up a little bit.
Things start getting a little better in 77. Then
they really start going up like this and really
starting looking fantastic about 79 and 80 and 81
and 82 and then going right down again. Now we're
just kind of going up again on the scale because
we're hearing of more deals. People are looking
for large hunks of space. People are looking
around, thinking of doing buildings. So we see
things happening, and things are getting better.
We're going to remodel this building over here,
which was the Superior Oil building until Mobil
bought them out. Mobil bought them out and cleaned
out the company. We got the building back, so we're
going to remodel that building and try to put that
back on the market. We've got the whole building is
empty, 80,000 feet. So we're going to remodel
that. We're remodeling the first floor lobby of
the Bank One building. So we're now doing several
things. We're planning for new commercial
developments, shopping centers, malls, and so
forth. We're doing remodeling of existing
buildings to upgrade the quality of those
buildings, and then we're building some new
buildings, both here and in That all sounds kind of
seat-of-the-pants. Is it seat-of-the-pants, or
do you employ market analysis firms or whatever to
look around and give you suggestions and ideas?
Yeah, I'd say that, well, let's see, what would be
an example? If we were going to do an office
building We would do a market survey in terms of
what are the demands for that kind of space to try to
give an idea of what size building we should do. And
what we would then do is develop a budget based on
that program, get the total project budget
prepared. Then we'd run a performa on the building
to determine can we really, of course, a lot of
them, once they see the pants, it's just using
judgment based on You know, your own knowledge or
what you can get from consultants. If we're going
to do, let's say, we want to do another small
village shopping center, we'll bring in a market
consultant, for example. He will then gather up
all the data that we have from, say, Mel DePay, who
does all our market research. And he can then see
how many people are living in that area right now
What's the potential for growth in that area based
on our development plans and what the growth has
been historically? And then he could say, well,
you can justify to build, let's say, 100,000
square feet here, but you need to have maybe 50,000
square feet this year, 75 this year, and then max
out 100 at that year. And if you do that, and if you
have this kind of a store, and then you have these
ancillary type of facilities here, I think it'll
work. We say, OK. So we then go through the land plan
to try to see if we can get a site, get the thing to
work. Then we will get cost estimates on that, as I
say, do a budget, do a performa. Let's say
everything goes smoothly that way. It doesn't
always go that way. Rarely ever goes that way.
proceed to go ahead and build it. Is Hallmark doing
the marketing for the mall? Yeah, well, we've done
it jointly with them. But there, you're talking
about a very long area, I mean, large area. They go
as far south as FM 1960 and go north to Conroe or even
Huntsville. It's a regional mall. Now, that
construction is actually destroyed on there? No,
no, no, no. I wish it had. Where are you? We're on a
standstill there. Part of that is due to hard
times, economy, and Sears store. You see,
Hallmark is part of Sears. The intent was to bring
Sears in as one of the first stores. Sears is having
financial problems.
They've been trying to get Sears in here. We've
been saying, look, we'd better let's drop Sears
and let's try to bring in someone else. So that's
what we're trying to do right now. We've got
Dillard's committed to open. We need to get
another one to start the first phase of the
development. Yeah, because don't you anchor
those things? Yeah. Oh, yeah. The mall is designed
to have, depending on how you want to count it, five
or six anchors. And it's designed so that we can do
the top part of the mall starting with two anchors
up here, two major department stores, which would
be like Dillard's and Sears. But, you know, we
could go with Dillard's and maybe Foley's or
Dillard's and maybe Penny's or, you know,
something like that. So we're in the process of
trying to see if we can pin someone down and make a
commitment to go in.
And where would that leave Hallmark, the
management firm? Oh, Hallmark. Hobart is
independent. The development company is
independent. They can operate independently of
Sears as a department store. However, they're
owned by the same company. They say they're
independent, but I notice that they seem to be
pretty tied to try to get Sears in. But we're
saying, look, time's going by and we need to get
this going. And the thing is that the Houston
economy, while it's improved, is still not, you
know, isn't that buoyant of an economy. Greens
Point Mall is our closest mall, and that's
probably 10 miles from here south of us. And it's
kind of rocky right now. Lord & Taylor, which is
their quality store, has moved out. And that's
brought, I think, the level of quality of that
center down. I think the population in that area
has shifted. Oh, it has. Sorry, it's this way over
here. Yeah, well, it's shifted in at the Economic
base of that area is lower. So they're looking at
that, and they're saying, well, look, if we build a
store here, all the people in this area are going to
go there. They're not going to go down to our
existing store down there, and the existing store
is not doing that well, so why should we build
another store up here? Dealers will go in here
because he doesn't have a store down there. Yeah,
he does. Huh? Is there a deal? Oh, that's right.
They took over Joski's. Yeah. It's a smaller
store. That's right. They took over Joski's, I
think. Is it Joski's? No. There is no Joski's down
there. No. Who did they take over Joski's? Huh?
Yeah, they took over Joski's. Yeah. I was looking
at the Galleria where they... Yeah, there is a
dealer. It's at Green's Point, isn't there? Yeah.
That's... They took over another store. It was
Joski's. I don't go there. I think Galleria. There
was a Dillard's and a Joski's, wasn't it? There was
a Joski's there. It was a separate freestanding
store right across the street from the Galleria,
right. And Foley's, our anchor in colonization is
Foley's and Dillard's. Yes, right. How's the
enrollment at A&M? Is it still going up? Well,
they've capped it. Have they? Yeah. From what I
hear in the Senate, they've got some enrollment
management things that are working. Which aren't
working, but in terms of actual leading it, I don't
know. Anyway, we've got about $41,000. Yeah, my
daughter went to A&M. Benching? Yeah, through
agriculture. In what field was she? She got her
bachelor's in agriculture economics, and then
she took her graduate degree also in
agri-economics, but her major emphasis was in
international trade. So she's now with the
Foreign Agriculture Service. Travels all over
the world. That's exciting. Represents the U.S.
government and the rice market. Oh, no kidding.
You have to read my book. I have a long history of the
American rice industry. Really? Yes, sir. She
would enjoy that. How current is your book? Last
year? Oh, I'd like to get a copy of that. Yeah, in
fact, she's delivering a speech in Kansas or
someplace today. That was an exciting project.
Really, yeah. She knows everybody. I mean, she
knows all the rice people in Thailand. But this
woman is just going to be translated into
Japanese? Yeah, Japanese. Well, her last trip,
she went to Seoul, Tokyo. Jakarta,
Bangkok. That's a fascinating world. It goes way
back, too. Oh, it's real interesting. I know. It's
real interesting. I didn't know anything about
it. I mean, I grew up in the city. I didn't know
anything about agriculture. A friend of mine,
Clive Harston, who just retired from . Did you know
a Dr. Cook in agriculture? Yeah. Dr. Cook was her
mentor. In fact, she was interested in coming back
here. We were sidetracking. And he's at
University of Missouri. And he was trying to
encourage her to come. What's going to happen?
Well, I think if the Houston economy can just keep
picking up, even if it's gradual, I think that
we're just on the threshold of doing our greatest
work here in the woodlands. I just see it just going
like this. prefer that the economy just creep up
gradually and solid base, rather than this big
spikes of boom and bust kind of thing. And then we
can develop very nicely. And I think with the
regional mall and what that would do to this whole
area, the spin-off of developments around malls,
have you seen up in Bryan College Station area or
anywhere else? We'll build office buildings
around here. That's why we're doing this plan
here. We're now talking about large office
buildings. I mean, we're really starting about
going big time. I just hope I can stay around to see
it all happen. Well, you know, that's what I've
since been talking about. Because I've suffered
through this all these years, hanging out with my
short fingernails. Now I'd like to stay here and
enjoy and see this tremendous, what I think should
be really tremendous development. I mean, we made
an offer to buy that downtown site, to build that
tower downtown Houston. What's that? Gottlieb
called that super block. Is that an internal kind
of thing? No, it's one block, downtown Houston,
right across from Shell Plaza. If you know where
Shell is, Shell is right here. Tenneco is here. Two
Shells here. The old Bank of the Southwest is right
here. There's just a block right there. Bank of
Southwest owned the land. They were going to build
that Bank of Southwest Tower. They had an
architectural competition in the 80s. And Murphy
Yan, Helmut Yan, architect from Chicago, won the
design competition. And they were going to build
that building. They, in fact, tore down a 20-story
building that was on the site for that building.
Well, again, they were ready to go ahead, and the
economy went down, and they didn't do it. And, of
course, then Bank of Southwest merged into become
M-Bank. And, of course, later they went bankrupt.
m corp then became then they went bankrupt so we had
offered to buy the site and we were well along i had i
was working with helen young from chicago we were
revising plans to come and do maybe about a
75-story office building it was a gigantic
project that's the kind of project you get into and
you'd be into it for four or five years we i had done
the budgets and we were around Last budget I did was
around $400, $450 million to do that building.
Incredible projects. I mean, they're so, you
know, you get into things like, you know, the
building's that tall, you know, with wind, they
want to move like that. Well, it's the first turn in
time I've heard of a tuned mass damper. It's like a
huge block of concrete up there that's tuned so
that when the building wants to go this way, this
thing is moving that way, and vice versa, to stop
the building from swaying. And then you get into
the analysis of the elevators, the mechanical
systems, and the security systems. I mean, it's
just like a little world into all of itself. That
building, when it moves, every piece of metal, and
glass, and roof, and everything's all moving at
the same time. How does all that move and stay
together? Could it just fly apart? Do you
anticipate that happening, something happening
now? Well, I think. I don't know if we're going to be
running out and doing a building like that. It
would be exciting if we would. But the reason we are
even looking at doing that is that the Shell Oil
Company was looking for a million square feet of
space. And it wasn't available if they were to move
and go into another building. And if we could have
got the Shell Oil Company to have agreed to enter
into an agreement with us, that would have given us
the basis to build that building. a multi-million
dollar development like that, you have to have a
major tenant in there to... It's not built on spec.
No, you go bankrupt overnight trying to do
something like that. So we were moving along
pretty well, but then the MCORP was in bankruptcy,
and the bankruptcy court judge said that they
couldn't sell the site to us. although they had
agreed to sell it to us, and said that there had to be
an auction to let any developer come in who wanted
to to buy that site in competition with us. Mr.
Mitchell decided then that he would withdraw his
offer to buy it. And one of the other problems is
that we were moving quickly trying to you know, get
the designs done, try to secure financing. Our
treasurer, George Lake, was working with people
in New York, and I think he had engaged Goldman
Sachs to try to then raise the funds to finance the
project. Well, we were just getting underway with
that when the judge said, oh, no, you're going to
have to have this auction. And we said, well, you
know, we're not ready. No, you're going to have the
auction. So Mr. Mitchell decided to withdraw our
offer to buy it, let them go have the auction. They
had the auction, and no one bid.
Does that put you back in? Well, the site's still
there, but also at the same time, the Shell Oil
Company decided to work with the Heinz Company,
who are the managers of the building that they're
in, to remodel their space to suit their
requirements and to stay there, which may have
been part of their strategy all along. One
other thing. We asked you, how does the
transportation element of the infrastructure of
the woodlands affect your planning, designing?
How has that? How does it? Our planning department
has the prime responsibility for doing the
overall general plan and then maintaining the
planning, working with the commercial and
residential divisions for their areas. They
employ consultants who do traffic planning,
traffic analysis. They'll study the present
population at the Woodlands, what the growth
patterns are, and then they'll say from there, You
need this road, this road, this road, this road is
what you need if you want to do that kind of
development. If you don't do that, you can do this,
this, and this. So they'll then come in and give us
options. We'll then go through a lot of discussion
and thinking about it and say, OK, we're going to do
this, this, and this. And then that kind of lays the
bare bones framework for what we will develop. In
other words, if you have a road that's two lanes
wide and if you want to have adequate
transportation, meaning automobiles, that's
not just bumper to bumper. If you want to have
people be able to drive, they have categories of
service going from like A to D or E. And probably if
you took, you know, if you got on a freeway and you
could just drive 65 miles an hour without ever
slowing down, that's probably category A. If
you're downtown on the Southwest Freeway at 5
o'clock and you're bumper to bumper, that's
probably category D or E. So there's that range of
service. That's how they talk about it. So if you
want to have, say, category C or B, and if it's a
two-lane road, then you can do, let's say... you
can do a million square feet, let's say, in this
area. All right? If you put a four-lane road in
there and you want to have the same category of
service, then maybe you can do three million
square feet. You want to put a six-lane road in
there so it goes like that. And then it determines
are you having surface connections? Are you going
to have overpasses? Then, of course, you get into
the consequences of the cost of that and things
like that. The traffic planning is very
much welded into the whole planning process
because we have to not only plan the roads for the
service of these areas, but we have to lay out the
roads so that we have developable parcels of land.
You don't want to have a lot of odd shapes and pieces
because you can't build in them very well or no one
will want to buy it. Normally, they want a nice
regular piece of land that has certain dimensions
to it to make the thing work. And we generally know
that if you have, say, 250 feet from here to here,
that generally satisfies most buyers'
requirements as to what they might want to do. So
traffic planning is very important. Most of our
traffic, well, all of our traffic planning is
surface roads. The planning department has been
working for years on a concept of trying to have
a... like a shuttle bus system that would run east
and west through the woodlands, and primarily in
what we call this town center area. And they had
carried the plans to quite a stage, and I think they
were going to make an application to the
Department of Transportation, but I don't think
it ever went through. Any rail talk at all, ever?
Well, no. I think that Spine... transit system
they were talking about. At one time, they thought
it might be light rail, but I think that they really
felt that the cost of that would be prohibitive.
And I think that they were thinking that it would be
a spine, all right, going right through, but it
would probably be like a bus system, shuttle bus
system. Or maybe all of a sudden, or helicopter pad
type things, feasible as transportation
devices? We've had helicopter pads since we
opened. When we opened the Woodlands, we created a
pad site right south of here where Woodlands
Parkway. See, Woodlands Parkway in the future is
going to go over Groves Mill Road like so. Well,
right now we come up like that and we stop and we take
the feeder road going across. So we create a
landing pad for helicopters. It's used quite
regularly. It's not a commercial pad. It's not a
heliport, but it is a landing pad. And then we
created another one. over by the first golf
course, but I don't think that one ever got used.
What about the medical center? I don't think a
medical, wait a minute, let's think. We've got a
garage there.
I can't remember if we have a pad on top of the garage
of that medical center or not. You've got the
ambulance entries on the top level of the garage. I
can't remember if we have a helicopter pad in there
or not. I know one thing I would ask you about is the
university. Where is that going? Well, that was
bad timing. As I said, I had, when I was with the
University of Houston, had got the agreement all
resolved for the donation of 400 acres of land,
really prime land, to the University of Houston.
The coordinating board are the ones who really
started this. the coordinating board became the
ones who were against it. And if you listen to the
coordinating board, he's still there. He was like
director of facilities in those days. I think he's
still head of it, or has he left? Not Gordon Flack.
Ashworth. Ken Ashworth. Ken Ashworth was
director of facilities when I was at the
University of Houston. He went and got his
doctorate when he was working there at UT. and then
came back to be the commissioner. Gordon Flack, I
think, who is now retired. I don't know if you know
those people. I don't know Ashworth. I don't know
Flack. But I think when Ashworth came in, looking
at it from his viewpoint, he saw that universities
and colleges were getting established around
Texas for political reasons. in many cases,
weren't really justified in terms of the
population and enrollment served, like, say,
Permian Basin, for example. You take a look at that
whole area. I mean, I was very much into taking a
look at population growth, enrollment trends,
and all this, because the University of Houston
really was using its facilities much better than
any other institution in the state. I mean, of
course, people at A&M and UT would like to hear
that, or they wouldn't agree with it. But I know
that they were. because they were being intensely
used because they didn't have the space that UT and
AM had. And you know when most professors like to
teach, and then you get into the, I can't remember
the terms we used, but it really dealt with percent
of occupancy and classroom utilization and all
that stuff. I can't even remember the terms
anymore, but I remember we got into all those
studies. and how I was trying to advocate that if we
could get all the professors to start at 8 o'clock
and quit at 6, we could even do better. Of course,
that went about like that in the academic sense.
But, you know, but like, well, I don't want to get
into a lot of stuff, but there were institutions
that had been approved in state legislatures that
had never been approved for political reasons.
And I think the... The Victoria campus,
University of Houston, was one that I don't think
should have ever... I was in that initial meeting
when those people came and talked to us.
University of Houston didn't go out for that. They
came to us. Or came to the University of Houston and
said, we want to get this. And I think maybe A&M
didn't want to do it or something. I don't think A&M
wanted to do that. In fact, when University of
Houston... I was told by Pat Nicholson, who was
there during all those... period when they were
trying to get the University of Houston to become a
state-supported. The University of Houston had
gone to the University of Texas. And I don't know if
they ever gone to A&M and said, we'd like to be a part
of your system. Well, I didn't know that. And they
said no. Nowadays, I mean, in the last 20 years,
they would have loved to have that. Oh, yeah. A&M
would have loved to have it too. Oh, yeah. But A&M
had dropped Arlington and everything they could
for a while. Well, as you probably know, there was a
lot of politics and a lot of decisions that were
made, like the downtown college that the
university required. That was political, too.
But anyway, so back to that story. I think Ashworth
rightfully saw that a lot of that was happening and
that it was costing the state of Texas a lot of money
to support, maintain, continue this. They've got
to put a lid on this and stop this proliferation of
colleges and universities throughout the state,
try to get some handle on how the state's going to
develop. Now, California had, I think, an
excellent system. There may be prejudice coming
from California, but they had the University of
California, and that took the top, I think, 12.5%
of the high school enrollment. Then they had the
state college system that took a top 33%. And then
any student graduated from high school could go to
the community college system. They had an
excellent community college system. Maybe 200
community colleges. And it was free. You went free
to community college. And if you can make it there,
then you could apply to either go to a state college
or to the university. There's one university.
University of California, and then the state
colleges, which, of course, the state colleges
never liked to be called state colleges. They
later became called state universities. But I
knew that system well. The state government had
adopted the plan. State Department of Finance
went along. State University of California had
done a restudy of population back in the 50s or so.
And that's what laid out the whole plan for the
Development University of California, which
then recommended the establishment of the major
campuses of the university, and to establish one
at Santa Cruz, San Diego, Irvine. There was an
excellent system. Texas never had a plan like
that. And it's been a free-for-all scramble. All
that stuff is really out there. It's just not been .
But that's what the coordinating board has been
trying to do. I mean, in the good old days, anybody
want to start a new department of history, go start
a department of history. Gottlieb this morning,
though, said or see if I remember this right, it was
his impression that had Mr. Mitchell gone with
either UT or A&M. Could have had it. Oh, yeah.
Because you probably know Mr. Mitchell is a
graduate of A&M, been a great supporter of A&M. But
he's always felt the University of Houston really
serves the Houston community. despite what UT and
A&M think, provide pretty good education for
people who cannot afford to go to A&M and UT, and has
done an excellent job. He felt that a campus here
should be related to the University of Houston
system as such, rather than A&M. He felt strong
about it, and that was it. He's had friends of his
who said to him, George, you've got an excellent
idea, but you've got the wrong university. And I'm
sure he's been said, if you go A&M or UT, you'll get
it. So anyway, back to your question. We got the 400
acres, donated to University of Houston about
this time, coordinating board afterwards,
restudying the whole, even though they said you
should expand, start to look back maybe seven or
eight years later and saying, well, things are
really ongoing. This is really a mess. We've got to
get some organization here. We can't let people
start new camps because it costs the state a lot of
money. And so they put a clamp on it. Dr. Hoffman
went to the coordinating board to make a petition
to try to get them to approve it. People from the
Huntsville area, Sam Houston and that, were
fighting politically to fight against it because
they thought that that would seriously affect the
enrollment at Sam Houston State University. Got
the support of one of their local state
legislators to come and argue against it. And it
didn't get approved, and that was really the last
big opportunity to get through. There had been
other attempts after that time, but never struck.
The land is still there, and Houston still has it?
No, the land is gone now. It's been used for other
purposes. So you really don't anticipate that
it's going to happen? I don't anticipate it coming
and happening. If it does, it'll be a long time from
now. That's unfortunate, because I think Mr.
Mitchell's correct, that would be an integral
element in the development of the community. Oh,
it would have been wonderful. Yeah, we had the area
all planned. It was on the other side of Lake
Woodlands. He felt that this would give an
opportunity for students in Montgomery County,
because there isn't anything beyond the 12th
grade here. And also, it would be a
state-supported institution. So, I mean, the
concept was great. The timing politically mean
politically in terms of the state and everything
was just unfortunate. And maybe if, you know,
maybe if Dr. Hoffman had, maybe if he had had the
opportunity to line up political forces himself,
it may have happened. But there are too many other,
you know, jealousies and territorial things
going along that were working against it by that
time. That's my view of the thing. So anyway, the
Woodlands lost having a campus at the University
of Houston. We tried to create a center here. And we
had it in a building up the road here to try to get
something started by offering courses. But that
became real hard to try to get professors to come
from the University of Houston and come here and do
that. And that's about when David Gottlieb got
involved, because he got involved in this little
center that we were starting.
Well, we're about to run out of your time, but would
you wrap us up? I know a while ago you said that you
see great times ahead for the woodlands in terms of
population growth. Yeah, well, in terms of our
commercial development. Do you think that kind of
expansion that you anticipate will change the
complexion, the environment in the woodlands? Do
you anticipate much change? It'll change the
appearance of this whole town center area as it
develops towards the mall and around the mall with
things like this. It's going to make a big change.
But I think the change is going to be one of quality.
And while it'll introduce a more urban character,
I think it's going to be a splendid contrast
between what we have now and what we have there. And
I think this will then start to give more of a focus
of a downtown compared to what we have now You know,
we've got a group of buildings here and some
buildings here, but there's no focus to the area.
And I think this will give some real center, real
focus to this commercial town center
development. And so I would see that in the future,
we're going to have larger buildings, you know,
10, 20-story buildings in height. Now, of course,
this is predicated on, hopefully, some slow to
moderate growth and improvement of the economy of
the Houston area. That would be a major
centerpiece. That would be a major centerpiece.
Plus, this is really a big window from I-45 into the
woodlands. Right now, you go by, it's all trees
along here. You don't know anything is here.
That's an interesting point. That's something
that has always struck me about the woodlands is it
was a mystery. Yeah, that's right. We say to
ourselves, that was really dumb of us. We should
have got right down here in the beginning and
started this development. We said, well, other
people said, well, we ought to start over the
center and work backwards. It's like the dumbbell
theory of development, where you own this piece of
land, and you develop this and develop this. You do
that because this becomes more valuable, because
you create the market forces. So we've had
arguments back and forth. I mean, this mall, when
Pereira designed it, was a way over here. And then
it's been here and here. Well, anyway, now it's
here. And so if that happens, we can say, well,
we've got this Pinecroft development that's
going to take place right here. And we've already
started the land development for a large Target
store. It's going to go up here because this is
here. So you can see things are going to start
happening. And this will be a gorgeous
development to drive here. This is going to be
about a 25-acre lake. Looking right across here,
there's going to be a hotel here. office building
here we're going to have a civic building there
this will be our first phase of this development
with three office buildings around a very large
parking structure looking onto this water it'll
be a beautiful development well the details are
nicely done yeah there's a sense of we put a lot of
effort into the planning of what we do and the
design. And there's a lot of people participate.
We all have our areas of responsibility, but
there's a lot of input coming from different
groups. So we put a lot of thought into it, and I
think the result is that we get good quality. And I
think people, as you come around, you can see the
quality right down to the signs and the roads and
the landscaping and how we deal with the natural
environment and everything. All right, sir. We
thank you very much. OK.